Purpose 
After hearing my speech, the audience will utilize mindfulness techniques to reduce their stress.

Introduction
	When was the last time you gave your brain a break? Many believe that the last time their brain rested was whenever they last slept, but even during sleep, the brain is occupied with creating dreams and sorting through memories. In actuality, the majority of people who have not been exposed to mindfulness practices have never truly experienced a state in which the brain was relaxed. Just like other muscles in our body, the brain deserves and requires time to rest. In contrast, when was the last time you were stressed? I would bet it occurred more recently then the last time you let your mind relax. As students, we often experience stress because we utilize our brain all the time and rarely set aside time to let it recharge. Because of the stress we experience, we should all employ mindfulness techniques in order to allow our brain to rest and reduce stress.

Central Idea
Because students undergo high levels of stress, they should employ mindfulness techniques in order to reduce this stress.

Preview
	First, we will learn about the problem of stress and how it negatively affects students. Second, we will explore some possible causes of students’ stress. Finally, we will understand why students should use mindfulness exercises to reduce stress. 

Body 
I. Students’ excessive stress is a problem that has many negative side effects.
A. Distress causes students to feel negative feelings and emotions.
1. The American Addiction Center Resource explains that distress is different from eustress because eustress is positive and motivational whereas distress is negative and unpleasant.
2. The University of Texas at Austin’s counseling and mental health center describes that stress can result in feelings of anxiety, depression, irritability, and fear. The site additionally adds that excess stress can affect thoughts by increasing difficulty of concentrating, forgetfulness, repetitive thoughts, and thoughts of failure.
B. Distress causes students to experience unhealthy physical responses and behaviors.
1. The University of Michigan’s Health Service adds that stress can negatively affect schoolwork and grades.
2. In my own experience, I have found myself feel physically tense, shaky, 
anxious, and unable to fall asleep at night because of the stress that being a 
student induces.
3. The University of Texas at Austin’s counseling and mental health center 
describes that stress can result in any combination of the following physical 
responses and behaviors: crying, snapping at friends, sleep disturbances, tight 
muscles, headaches, fatigue, stomach aches, more colds/infections, rapid 
breathing, and many more.
Signpost: In order to determine a solution for the problem of stress, we must understand the main causes of stress.
II. Stress is caused by many events in students’ lives.
A. Students experience more stress now than ever before because they live in a delayed return environment.
1. James Clear, a psychology researcher and writer, explains that all creatures brains were developed to live in immediate return environment, but humans have changed our environment to be delayed return environment which causes us to experience prolonged periods of stress.
2. Jean M. Twenge, a psychology professor at San Diego State University, explains that overall stress has increased overtime because we have weaker ties to community, focused on monetary goals, and high expectations.
	B. Events that take place in students lives can lead to prolonged periods of stress. 	
1. The University of Texas at Austin’s counseling and mental health center 
describes that students can become stressed because of finances, living with roommates, clases, work. Additionally students often feel guilty about wasting time, not meeting standards, and being lonely.
2. In my own experience, specific events vastly increase stress. Some of the events in my life that have causes stress include deaths of loved ones, difficult course load, and lack of sleep.
Signpost: Although some causes of stress are unpreventable, utilizing mindfulness techniques can decrease the effect of stress on students.
III. Students should utilize mindfulness techniques to reduce stress.
	A. Mindfulness techniques are practical and easy to incorporate into every day.
		1.  The University of Texas at Austin’s counseling and mental health center  
explains that mindfulness requires a state of intentional focus in the moment, and mindfulness is a part of other activities such as yoga and meditation. The site also describes that successful mindfulness techniques utilize awareness, focus, acceptance, and observation.
2. I have found that on the app store there are many free apps that have guided recordings for mindfulness techniques such as deep breathing, yoga, meditation, progressive muscle relaxation. Some of these apps include: headspace, calm, and mindfulness coaches. These apps have recordings that last as short as three minutes and are free tools to help us give our brains a break.
	B. Mindfulness techniques are scientifically proven to reduce stress and have other 
beneficial effects.
1. University of Michigan’s University Health Service states that implementing mindfulness techniques not only helps students decrease stress, but it also helps improve quality of life overall.
2. The University of Texas at Austin’s counseling and mental health center explains that practicing mindfulness can help reduce both stress and some effects of stress.
3. Aura Health tells us that a Harvard Medical School study found that mindfulness decreases the amount of gray matter in the amygdala which is related to stress and anxiety. Additionally, practicing mindfulness increases the amount of gray matter in the hippocampus which is related to memory and learning.

Conclusion
	Stress is a very prevalent issue in today’s society. It has been connected to a multitude of negative side effects that can affect both behaviors and feelings for long periods of time. For students, there are a multitude of possible causes including school work, jobs, relationships, and many other short or long term events that induce stress. Although the causes of stress are unavoidable for the most part, the intensity of stress and its effects can be reduces by giving our brains a break. One of the most effective ways to reduce these effects is to practice mindfulness. Mindfulness involves focusing our thoughts on only the present moments and not worrying about the past or the future. Because mindfulness is free and does not require an extensive amount of time, students should utilize this stress-decreasing practice as frequently as possible. When you practice mindfulness, you help reduce the overall everyday stress you feel and will benefit in other ways as well. I urge every one of you to find a few minutes each day to try some of the mindfulness techniques I explained and feel the results for yourself. I guarantee that your busy brain will thank you.


